Can you recall any goofy incidents that you encountered because of a class being in an unusual location where you went to the wrong place or students got mixed up?
Oh, that happened frequently.
It wasn't unusual to have that happen on the first day.
No one expected to have history classes in the meat labs building or in geology, for instance.
One of our favorite rooms in those days was geology in Bolton Hall.
They were both terrible rooms.
Now you could argue Bolton Hall was okay because Bolton just across from Nagel is right next to academic.
But that old lecture hall in Bolton was a horrible place and we used to kid about the one in geology that had bats flying around up at the top of it up there.
And students got lost in that sense and didn't know where they were.
Did you have a favorite and an unfavorite place to teach?
Oh gosh, yes.
I hated, well, it would have been a draw.
There were some classrooms in, oh, I'm terrible, Francis Hall.
Francis Hall had some rooms that were long and skinny.
And I mean they were long, seven or eight seats wide, but 10 and 15 seats deep.
You could teach seven, eight.
And so you had this little long room here standing in front of the room, and you have students in the way in the back.
Those were the worst rooms I really thought for teaching because it was hard.
There was no sound system.
It was hard to get your words from the front of that room, long and narrow, to the very back of that room.
Some of the best classrooms for teaching were in physics because there was amphitheaters there.
You were down.
The students were kind of there.
The big rooms in geology in Bolton were terrible because they were bad rooms.
So the one in Meat Labs, they were bad rooms because of the way they constructed, but they weren't uncomfortable rooms, and students at least could hear you along that line.
And you did not use any audio vision?
I never used much of it, no.
I used maps.
We had hanging maps.
And I took hanging mats and would hang them up on nails if they were, and then I would use a pointer, and I would frequently use those in some aspects.
About when did you begin to have a TA to assist you?
Well, we had graders, of course, in the early days, seniors, senior history majors.
We had graders from the very beginning, way back.
I'm kind of hard to remember now, but I suppose under Keith is when we began to get really a real T, and that's when the graduate program began to grow, really, during Keith's period, that we began to get teaching assistants in to help you grade.
And about how large do you remember 105, 106?
What would have been a typical in the 70s, 80s, 90s?
Well, in the early days, they were 35, 40, 45.
Then they'd go to 70, and then they'd go as much as 250.
I taught as many as 250 students.
But a lot of the rooms we taught in when they built Harrington, they built a bunch of rooms in there, and they were anywhere from 100 to 250.
And we used those rooms extensively.
When you ask where we taught, Harrington Classroom Edition was used extensively by us.
And as I said, anywhere from 100 to, oh, that's not true.
They had a few with 50 and 60, and we used those as well.
But we used those big classrooms a lot.
Now with the move to academic,
Did that change parking and the departmental routine?
Oh gosh, yes, it changed parking a lot because we were no longer, some are still parking in Nago, but of course those people living in Nago, Wildlife Sciences wanted those parking places, and so they got most of them in.
Where did y'all then park?
Oh, a variety of places in.
Some were parking, some were parking there,
that parking lot right near the old, what was in the exchange store, and some were parking across the street from there, and in many different places really then.
Did the social life of the department change under the new department heads after Dr. Nance?
We remained fairly social under Gooch and Keith Bryant.
And I think actually we were, well, we were social under all of them.
Because even under Hill, the person I retired under, we still had parties and things.
But I think that we became more clique, more cliques involved.
And we got so big that we had different groups in which they operated within themselves, partying and things like that then.
Who was in your clique?
Oh, Herb Lang, Garland Bayless, Claude Hall, Henry Detloff.
Those had all been close friends of mine at the time, and a few other people too then.
All right.
Keith came as department head.
Then he moved up to be dean?
Dean.
Moved up to be dean.
And who replaces him?
Detloff replaces Keith.
Now how, what was the process that ended up selecting an insider instead of an outsider?
Well, they went on a search.
And why they did it, I don't know.
Henry eventually was chosen as the head then.
What was his style as department head?
Pretty much hands off.
Detloff is very much a gentleman and reasonably religious, I think.
And I told Henry this so it's not saying anything.
Henry believed you ought to do the right thing because it's the right thing.
You do the right thing because it's the right thing.
And I try to tell Henry as did David Stewart in English.
David Stewart used to tell Henry, no, Henry, people don't do the right thing because it's the right thing.
You've got to make them do the right thing.
And Henry refused to do that.
And to some extent, Henry lost control of the department.
Let me turn that off.
As I was saying, Henry was a gentleman, and he didn't believe he should lie, cheat, and steal.
And he was an academician.
He believed Irwin Howard was an academician, that you should do your teaching, keep office hours, do your work, and mind your own business.
And he just didn't understand how people didn't do that.
And I think he lost control of the department to a large extent because he didn't understand that.
And by that time, the department was located?
We're still an academic.
Oh, okay.
We moved from Nago to academic, and we stayed in academic there then, a whole of that time.
We moved from academic then to the old Ag-Eco building.
Mm-hmm.
And that's about when?
Oh, I'm sorry.
No, no.
We're in Harrington.
We moved from Harrington.
We moved from academic to Harrington.
Which floor?
Fifth floor.
Fifth floor?
Bryson Gooch was head through the academic building.
I think Keith came in then and took over in the academic building.
And then we moved to Harrington under Keith.
And then Henry was head most of the time when we were in Harrington Tower on the fifth floor.
And then Henry then was replaced Keith.
And then Larry became head.
And then Larry was head, replaced him by Julia Blackwilder.
And under Julia Blackwilder, we moved to Ag Econ.
And all right, you said that you're
fear that Henry lost control of the department.
Can you give any some examples of?
Well, I think some of the younger members rebelled against the idea of being a head, although we still have a head, technically Julia Blackwell's head.
And she runs the work, by the way, basically as a head still.
And Henry was head, but Henry wouldn't use his power all the time.
And so he had these people that
stabbed him in the back, rebelled against him, talked against him, and he still treated him fairly.
And he didn't ever punish anybody.
And it's a sad thing to say, and I know this is a terrible thing for him to be saying, but some of those people need to be punished.
We had people in the department who were interested only in their own career.
A number of members have left now.
They only cared about what they were going to do.
They did not, we had a large number of people who did not care about Texas A&M University.
It was a Pitts as far as they were concerned.
They did not care for students.
As one of my colleagues walked to my office one time and was furious because there was a book he wanted was checked out by a student.
Well, I would have been pleased to think my student was checking books out and reading them, but he was furious.
That's an example then.
And our departmental meetings became long-winded.
They became factional.
They became arbitrary, backbiting.
If someone wasn't there, they'd get stabbed in the back.
When it came time for selecting department heads and things like that, people who would support people to their front and then oppose them behind their backs then.
And that became fairly common.
Our faculty meeting became really bad.
No one wanted to go to them.
And Henry was department head about how long?
Oh, seven or eight years, I guess, yeah.
And then succeeded by Larry Hill.
Yeah, by Larry Hill.
Is there an outside search?
Is this a general search?
There's a general search again, yes, but they wanted to stay in-house, I think.
They weren't interested in going out, really.
All right.
Describe Larry's style, then.
Larry was head.
And Larry had a hands-off policy, more so than Henry did.
If things were running smoothly, Larry didn't really care what went on.
For instance, one of my serious gripes at Larry was we'd often get directives, and I told him this, and he would be saying, you're not supposed to do this and this and this.
For instance, using a telephone, using supply like this.
We all knew who was doing it.
I wasn't doing it.
Hardly anyone else was doing it.
We knew who was using the phone for their personal calls and things like that.
We knew who was using a lot of stationery.
A lot of our attitude was don't send directives to us, you know.
Tell those people who are doing it.
And so to some extent Larry followed Henry's way.
He left things alone.
but he was more apt to send out directives about what we should not be doing, but he didn't do anything about it really basically then.
Larry's not a bad head.
Things ran fairly smoothly, but Larry again.
The difference between Henry and Larry is that the opponents, I shouldn't use the word troublemakers, those unhappy with situations
ended up having Henry's enemies.
On the other hand, many of those people who were fractional and causing trouble were Larry's friends, and so things didn't, you know, things went more smoothly.
And under Larry there was a great drive then to be less colloquial, to be more universal,
For instance, we started discouraging master's degrees.
We didn't want to do master's degrees.
We want to do PhDs, and that's a fact.
After the departmental meeting, we're discouraging.
Whereas our bread and butter, the graduate program in the early days, as you remember, with bread and butter, was those people coming back in college, finishing up a master's degree.
Well, we discourage them.
I've heard it said right out in the meetings that's what it was going to be.
And so we try to become...
we become even more compartmentalized.
And one of the ironies of that is, is that instead of we want to become strengthened and we want to become a national university, but then those areas which we might have become really big in, for instance, military science.
We had Vandiver, we had Beaumont,
We had a chance several times to hire some big name people.
Some of those people opposed it.
Some of those very people who talked in terms of let's become national, let's really become specialists.
They then opposed us hiring those people where we might have become really a national power in military science, the study of military science.
What, in what areas do you think the department became best known?
What special fields?
Military science, Texas history,
Maybe some in some diplomatic, but I'm not sure anything else really.
Larry, then he serves about five years?
Oh, no longer.
That's eight or nine years.
He serves a long time.
Then he is replaced by Julia Blackwell.
Yes, and that was a national search.
And we were told openly to hire outside.
We were told we could hire inside.
but it would be detrimental.
So from the very beginning, we knew that we were going to go outside.
And didn't the department get an extra position if they hired a female?
Yeah.
And if we hired within, we would lose the position.
And in terms of style, how did Dr. Blackwelder compare with her predecessors?
Well, Blackwelder is ahead again, and
Julia consults with people but then she's much like Gucci, she does what she wants to do.
I've been gone now two and a half years now but I talk to people and Julia is very pro-feminist and so the women in the apartment have got special, everything is special treatment.
And that's not from one of them.
I've heard that from a number of people.
And lots of people think there's not much comradeship.
I don't blame it on Julia.
I think that earlier when we came, we had such factions involved and such cliques, that destroyed the camaraderie of the department already.
That broke it down.
Well, for instance, we don't have a Christmas party anymore.
We have a holiday party.
By that, the people in charge one year decide to have it at the Hillel Foundation, which is fine.
But we get a directive from them.
Jews don't believe.
Jews can't eat shellfish.
Therefore, it would be inappropriate for us at our party to have shellfish.
You know who was mad at all people?
Arnie Kramer.
Because Arnie Kramer, who is Jewish background, Arnie's typical thing to bring to the Christmas party was a shrimp Christmas tree.
You know, one of those things with shrimp on it.
Well, we weren't supposed to bring.
Well, that really bothered people.
A lot of people wouldn't go.
And from that time on, it just went downhill.
And it ceased being a Christmas party.
It becomes a holiday party or actually sometimes an end of the semester party.
And it just kind of fell into disuse.
It was a very big thing when you were here.
We all enjoyed going.
It was nice to have.
I didn't care whether I went or not.
Lots of times our girl and I were talking, are you going to go?
I don't know if I'm going to go or not.
And it just became badly attended.
And also that one part of Hillel, they hired a band which played hard rock.
And most of us left because we couldn't take the music.
And I think that's fairly typical.
Now, Julius tried to be social.
Larry, at the beginning of the year, had a beginning of the year program, partied at his house ordinarily.
And graduate students were invited, and we were invited.
And so Larry tried to develop a social camaraderie.
And I think Julia has done as well, but I think that they're poorly attended.
As far as you can compare numerically, about how many people were in the department when you arrived and when you retired?
Well, when I retired, what, 7, 8, 10, if you include government?
No, no, no, no.
When you got here?
Yeah, there could have been more than eight or 10 in the department.
I can name them all off, you know.
What about when you retired?
45.
And maybe more than that if you count the peripheral ones like David Chapman who teaches courses.
And when did research become to be a heavily emphasized part of the departmental evaluation system?
I think under Gooch.
I think by the time Gooch left, that research was a major issue.
Did quality teaching lose in importance?
Oh yes, I think so.
I think most of the people I've ever talked to would agree with me, and it's just not me alone.
They all agree that teaching is only used if it benefits the administration.
if they want to use it.
I think you can be a bad teacher, a bad teacher, and if you've done the research and are doing research, that's all that counts.
It's research first, and then coming along way down the line is service and teaching.
During all these years that you taught in the department, was it normal to try, for each faculty member, to try to do some teacher evaluation by the students?
Sure.
Nearly everybody did teacher evaluation.
We all passed out.
We all asked the students to write an evaluation.
You know, we'd get a piece of paper and write on it, you know, so there couldn't be any correlation with them.
Some people even worked up little surveys, you know, where they handed it out and you had to check it off.
Most people I knew gave some type of thing.
I did that when I was at Texas.
I asked students to write my strengths and weaknesses.
The thing I found amusing at that time was that so many of them liked me because I was so conservative and so many of them liked me because I was so liberal.
And it gets canceled out.
I distrusted the evaluations because I
I deliberately set out one semester to raise my scores, and I raised them, man, I raised them.
I'm not gonna ask the negative.
In your almost 40 years of service in the department, which of your colleagues did you respect most for their teaching abilities?
Oh, I think Herb Lang, Claude Hall, Alan Ashcraft, Haskell Monroe.
Keep coming on up toward the— Gosh.
Henry Detloff.
Oh, good grief.
I'm having a terrible time on names here, remembering everybody.
David— Shobe.
Shobe.
And by the way, all those people not only were good teachers, I think, they also were good with their students.
They kept office hours, they worked with their students, and things like that then.
And I think all those people worked very hard with their students and tried to be good teachers.
And they were also good colleagues, weren't they?
Right, good colleagues, all of them good colleagues.
Now, you didn't mention many that have come within the last 20 years.
Well, it's hard for me to evaluate some.
I don't know some of these people as well.
I know some of them are bad teachers because I was undergraduate advisor for 10 years and I got the kickback on that.
And I think there are a few of those who are good teachers.
What about Ernie Kramer?
I think Ernie Kramer is a good teacher.
Now, you asked about people being easy.
Ernie is considered to be one of the easiest people in the department.
Really?
If you go to class and you mind your own business, I think you're going to get by all right then.
But Arnie does not pretend to be tough.
And Arnie does not pretend to make his classes tough.
To some extent, Arnie entertains.
And he does a good job at it.
And Arnie's, and I think that Arnie probably gets across a lot of the stuff he wants gets across.
You became the departmental undergraduate advisor when?
About 10, 12 years ago.
Under whom?
Under Henry.
What was that, describe that task.
Well, in those days, we had a lot more paperwork than we have now.
I didn't have computers, so everything was done by hand.
Actually, there were three of us, and I was only one of those.
Claude Hall was kind of in charge.
Actually, when I began, Bonnie Statham was in charge, more or less, and I became an assistant along with a guy named Fasani.
You never knew Fasani.
He's at Oklahoma now.
And then Pasani dropped out and I became more of it.
Then Claude Hall came in and he kind of headed it.
And then Bonnie dropped out and left.
And then I eventually came to head it along with Rosenheim and Linehan.
And I kind of directed in a very general way with Rosenheim and Linehan helping.
And then they would drop out.
And I was doing it almost all by myself with some graduate assistants.
And as the computers came in then, we did more and more with computers then.
And computers made it nice in the sense that you could look things up directly then.
Now, did you work with all department history majors?
Yes.
And what?
Not graduates now.
We got a separate graduate advisor.
What would be their needs, concerns, worries?
Primarily, what were these conversations about?
Taking the right courses, fulfilling the requirements.
There's a strong move on the campus right now to do with undergraduate advising.
In fact, most departments are going to graduate students to do it and things like that then.
The general attitude is I think that students are smart enough, they come in, they ought to be able to do it themselves.
Why should you give them assistance?
But my experience is even the smart ones, there were very few students who came in and told me what they were going to do.
There were very few who came in who were lost.
But the great middle of that weren't really sure and they needed somebody to talk to.
And while it's very simple to us about what you have to take, you have to have six hours of this, six hours of that, 12 of this, it's surprising how many students aren't really worth sure.
And now that, what classes could they take?
And you can argue, well, all you gotta do is sit down and read the catalog.
Well, I read the catalog many, many times before I understood the catalog.
And I argue that it takes six months to a year before you get a decent undergraduate advisor.
If it takes me six months to a year to understand the catalog,
Because the catalog is ambiguous in places.
Well, how long is it going to take a 18, 19-year-old sophomore to understand it?
And so I strongly believe that, and we always thought that this made A&M different.
A&M supposedly cares about the students, and we're different.
We take students in, and we help them, and we're student-oriented.
But I'm afraid, and I told one of my good friends and my wife's chairman of her board was on the
the president's council, and I told him that all this talk about advising students is for the birds.
He better be aware of it, that they really don't care that much, and undergraduate advising has really gone down.
From the days Claude Hall was doing it, others were doing it, I was doing it, where we sat down with a student, went through their program, and that sort of thing.
Now normally you, once you accepted that role, your teaching load and your advising load was what?
Well, you had a reduced course.
And as time went on, that was reduced more because we were spending more and more time.
And we had more and more.
We had 400 undergraduates.
One section?
I got one section in summertime and two in the regular semester.
And you would be in the office from 8 to 5?
No.
I kept hours.
I was there all day.
several days, and then I was there part-time.
It depends on how many advisors we had.
If I was the only one doing it, as I was for a while, then I was there almost all the time.
If we had other people like when others were doing it, then we looked at each other, we talked about it, and we traded off to where there was somebody there 40 hours a week then.
Give examples of some of the serious and the goofy problems that you encountered with these students.
I had a girl come in and sit down.
By the time she left, I was going to have to get a rug cleaner to mop up the water.
She cried so much.
She had somehow or another gotten the idea that only 30 hours were required.
She only had 30 hours of history.
She had a job waiting for her and that sort of thing.
We had to work with that.
I talked to Julia about it.
We finally decided to let her go.
The dean of the college for a good while there was Woodrow Jones, and whether it was Woody's idea or not, whether he was the one who came up with the idea, we wanted to graduate people.
Unless there was really a good reason why, we weren't going to keep anyone from graduating for small reasons.
Graduate them.
And so she had everything else in the world, and so we found three hours, converted, and graduated her.
Another one I had was a guy was trying to graduate and he had gotten the idea that he didn't need six hours of math.
He had to take it, but he didn't have to pass it.
I'm serious.
He had taken six hours of math and flunked it.
The catalog says you must take six hours of math.
I'm sitting there looking at him, just aghast, you know.
Well, we didn't make any exception there, and he had to go take it.
And he never passed it A&M, and so he was going to take it someplace else.
And so that's one of those wild stories here about how can you believe that.
Well, I took it, but I didn't pass it then.
So those are kind of extreme cases.
Did any student or anyone in the student's behalf ever attempt to offer money or influence?
Oh, yes.
I'd do anything, you know, what can I do for you and things like that then.
That was more common in the past than it was in the present.
I had very little of that the last bit.
But back in the 70s, I think, and in the middle 80s, there was a lot of that.
Well, I say a lot of it.
It certainly went on, yes.
Did anybody offer you, say, a trip somewhere?
No, but I was offered do anything, you know, how can I help you, what can I do, you know, and things like that.
Did any, no board member, no?
I never had a board member in any way interfere with me, yes, uh-huh.
anybody in the higher administration on campus?
Yes.
I had, uh, we had a dean of men here for a while.
He didn't stay very long, by the way, who called me a number of times trying to influence me on things.
And he was only here a semester and then he was gone.
So I got, he did that to some other people as well.
But that's the only real one I remember.
Did the Corps ever try to get special?
Oh, the Corps was always calling about people and things like that.
And I had a few times where Trigon officers called and talked about certain people, but never any open bribes.
What about athletics?
Yeah, had a few were on athletics, yeah.
That's a long time ago, too.
It was generally the counselor.
Mm-hmm.
And I don't remember ever having a coach call me, but I had counselors talk to me.
That's after Bud Denton, because Bud Denton never did it.
Let's see, women colleagues in the department, who was the pioneer?
Was Bonnie?
No, no, no.
We had a woman here who taught part, who taught in the department
whose husband, and she taught in the apartment when we were in Nagel.
Red-haired lady, I don't remember her name now.
And she was in the apartment, and she taught for several years after I was here, and I do not remember her name then.
And then... Then Bonnie.
Bonnie.
And then... All right, now Bonnie has always thought of herself as the pioneer female on the campus almost.
Isn't that correct?
That's not true.
No, there were other women.
No, but... Yeah.
They had several women in modern languages and in English, you know.
Do you remember any problems?
No.
I don't remember any.
As I said, we had the lady who taught for several years in the department.
I'm not sure she was ever full-time.
I don't think she was tenured, but nevertheless she taught.
Among the deans, how would you rate them in leading the College of Liberal Arts?
Well, Hubert was a good dean, and Hubert had his faults, undoubtedly.
But Hubert ran a taut ship, but you know where you stood, and things ran smoothly.
Hubert was the old school.
But we have not had a good dean.
since then.
Maxwell was high-handed, stabbed in the back, dictatorial.
So was Keefe.
The following dean was no better, and I think Jones has tried to be a good dean.
I think of those deans, of the ones I've talked about, he's tried to be a good dean, but his temper
and things like that have gotten in the way.
Among the other deans at that time on the campus, which dean do you think had the highest status with his colleagues?
Well, I'm sure Maxwell had high status with economics because he took care of them.
Oh, no, no, no, no, no.
With his, I mean, with his dean colleagues.
Which arts and sciences or liberal arts dean did the other deans?
Well, I think it would be Hubert probably.
No doubt in my mind Hubert.
I don't think any of the deans probably had any high stature.
That would have been my guess too.
I don't think so, no.
And I think some of them, Maxwell always fought the wrong battle
Keith didn't fight any battles.
His successor did his own thing pretty much and had his own ideas and I think Woody had just simply been handicapped by health problems and that sort of thing and very violent.